you
one of the grandest scientific tools
ever made by mankind is called an atom
smasher and I mean literally grand the
biggest one ever built the Large Hadron
Collider or LHC is a ring with a
circumference of about 18 miles that's
more than the entire length of Manhattan
so what is an atom smasher it is a
device that collides atomic nuclei
together at extremely high energy the
most powerful one scientists have ever
built can heat matter to the hottest
temperatures ever achieved temperatures
last seen a trillionth of a second after
the universe began our accelerators are
full of engineering superlatives the
beam containing region of the LHC is a
vacuum with lower pressure than what
surrounds the International Space
Station and is 456 degrees Fahrenheit
below zero colder than the temperature
of deepest space a previous accelerator
sitting in the LHC tunnel holds the
world record for velocity accelerating
an electron to a speed so fast that if
it were to race a photon of light it
would take about 14 minutes for the
photon to get a lead of about 10 feet if
that doesn't impress you remember the
photon is the fastest thing in the
universe it goes about 186,000 miles per
second so how do these subatomic
particle accelerators work well they use
electric fields electric fields make
charge particles move in the same way
that gravity will pull a drop baseball
the force from the electric field will
pull a particle and make it move the
speed will continue to increase until
the charged particle is moving
incredibly fast a simple particle
accelerator can be made by hooking two
parallel metal plates to a battery the
charge from the battery moves on to the
two metal plates and makes an electric
field that pulls the particle along and
that's it you've got a particle
accelerator the problem is that an
accelerator built this way is very weak
building a modern accelerator like the
LHC this way would take over five
trillion standard D cell batteries so
scientists use much stronger batteries
and put them one after another an
earlier accelerator used this method and
it was about a mile long it was
equivalent to about 30 billion batteries
however to make an accelerator that is
equivalent
five trillion batteries would require an
accelerator 150 miles long scientists
needed another way while electric fields
will make particle go faster magnetic
fields make them move in a circular path
if you put an electric field along the
circle you don't need to use miles of
electric fields you can use a single
electric field over and over again the
beams go around the circle and each time
they gain more energy so very high
energy accelerators consist of a short
region with accelerating electric fields
combined with long series of magnets
that guide the particles in a circle the
strength of the magnets and the radius
of the circular path determines the
maximum energy of the beam once the beam
is zooming along then the real fun
begins the Smashing the recent physicist
want to get those particles moving so
fast so they can slam them into one
another these collisions can teach us
about the fundamental rules that govern
matter but they'd be impossible without
the feed of engineering that is the
particle accelerator
you